* Homo Sapiens (our species), are animals from the genus Homo (man) and the species Sapiens (wise). Members of the Homo genus evolved in East Africa about 2.5 million years ago. This means that when Sapiens first evolved, there were multiple other Homo species on this planet including the more famous Homo Neanderthalensis. The truth is that from about 2 million years ago to until around 10,000 years ago the world was home to several human species. Only our species survived to the present day and we are not sure why this is.
* From about 300,000 years ago our genus began using fire. This created a revolution as it allowed us to cook food — allowing us to eat foods we normally can’t digest, killing bacteria and massively decreasing the amount of time chewing and digesting our food. It is believed that this revolution allowed us to grow the jumbo brains we are now so used to.
* Homo Sapiens, humans that look just like us, first appeared on East Africa around 150,000 years ago. At this point we were an inconsequential species fighting for our survival like many others on this planet.
* Something very special happen around 70,000 years ago that lead to what is called the Cognitive Revolution. From around 70,000 years ago to 30,000 years ago Sapiens experienced unprecedented prosperity allowing us to leave Africa and reach places as far as Australia. It is in this time that boats, oil lamps, bows, arrows and needles (for clothe making) were invented. During this period we also see the development of art, religion, commerce and social stratification. It is commonly believed that a genetic mutation allowed us to think and communicate in unprecedented ways thus igniting this revolution.
* There is something very special about out language habilites, specifically our ability as a species to speak about fiction. We are the only animal that can speak about things that don’t exist and from this collaborate in flexible ways that no other animal is able to. This is why we rule the world.
* There are no gods in the universe, no nations, no money, no human rights, no laws, and no justice. All of these concepts exist solely in the imagination of human beings.
* It is this diversity of imagined realities that Sapiens invented and the resulting different behavior that we today refer to as “culture”. Ever since we created a culture these have changed and developed leading to the changes in what we refer to as “history”.
* The transition to agriculture began around 9500 years ago and today 90 percent of the calories that feed humanity come from plants that our ancestors domesticated between 9500 and 3500 BC — wheat, rice, maize, potatoes, millet and barley. Even though the Agricultural Revolution increased the food supply this extra food did not translate in an increase in the quality of life for most humans. It lead to a population explosion, social and class division, exploitation and diet problems that had never existed before.
* The Agricultural Revolution allowed Sapiens to settle and begin forming large communities that had never before existed. These communities began developing different “cultures” to organize themselves. It is this imagined order that allows us to cooperate effectively and as such create a more specialized society.
* Human Rights is an imagined order. A Homo Sapiens has no natural rights in the same way that a dog, elephant, dolphin or ant have no natural rights. Gravity, a natural order, will not cease to exist tomorrow. In contrast an imagined order is only valid because enough people believe in its truth or validity.
* Since all these imagined orders that we created are not passed down in our DNA we needed to create external tools to preserve them. A great leap in helping us maintain the imagined orders that we created came with the invention of full script writing — cuneiform — invented around 3000 BC and 2500 BC by the Sumerians.
* Sapiens are able to organize in mass cooperation networks even though we lack the biological instincts to do so due to our created imagined orders and devised scripts. It is these myths and fiction that accustomed us from the momento of birth to think in certain ways and behave in accordance with certain standards, to want certain things and to observe certain rules. This network of artificial instincts is called culture.
* Money is the most universal and most efficient system of mutual trust ever devised. And the best part, it all lives in the imagination of Sapiens. It is thanks to this system of trust society was able to cooperate in newer ways and develop. Money is the only system developed by humans that can bridge cultural gaps and does not discriminate.
* An empire, also a Sapiens creation, has been the world’s most common form of political organization for the last 2,500 years. Empires allow people and cultures to develop while furthering cooperation.
* Religion, another great unifier of mankind, has given superhuman legitimacy to the fragile social orders and hierarchies. Religion asserts that our laws are not the result of some human caprice, but they are created by a supreme authority. This helps place some “fundamental” moral and behavioral standards of our society beyond challenge therefore ensuring social stability.
* In the past 500 years of our history we have seen unprecedented growth and power of our species. This process is known as the Scientific Revolution. Rooted in this revolution is a belief that the problems that plagued humans were not our inevitable fate but rather the result of our ignorance. This quest to acquire new knowledge to solve problems has given Sapiens unprecedented power.
* A capitalist creed developed in Europe whose first and most important belif is: The profits of production must be reinvested in increased production. Capital is the investment of resources to create new production and it is different from wealth accumulation or wasted on unproductive activities. It is through this ideal that we have seen unprecedented economic growth in the world.
* The most important economic resource in a “free market” is economic trust in the future. It is the job of a political system to ensure trust in this market by legislating sanctions cheats and provide the support necessary (police, courts, jails) to enforce the law.
* The Industrial Revolution is fundamentally a revolution in the conversion of energy which we have proven to only be limited by our ignorance. Every time we have felt we hit a limit, through our ingenuity we discover a new source of energy to keep satisfying our insatiable demand.
* We live in an unprecedented era of peace brought about by the invention of the atomic bomb, which dramatically escalates the price of war, and by the declining profits of war. For most of our history, nations enriched themselves through looting or annexing territories. In today’s society wealth consists mainly of human capital and organizational know how. Both of these cannot be conquered by military force.
* Family and community have a larger impact on our happiness than money or health. Most disturbing, our happiness is the result of our biology. We have evolved through natural selection to never be in complete éxtasis or complete misery. Evolution requires us to have mood swings, and those are relative to our circumstance not absolutes. Money, social status, plastic surgery, beautiful homes, powerful positions. None of them will bring us happiness. Lasting happiness comes only from serotonin, dopamine and oxytocin.
* A meaningful life can be extremely satisfying even in the midst of hardship, whereas a meaningless life is a terrible ordeal no matter how comfortable it is.
* Today, Sapiens are on the cusp of a biological revolution that will alter 4 billion years of natural selection to replace it with intelligent design. The consequences of this revolution would be far greater than anything out little species has achieved before. Self-made gods with only the laws of physics to keep us company and accountable to no one.
