# The Improvisation Handbook

Improvisation is a very peculiar way of entertaining an audience, and contains a number of traps for the unwary. If no emphasis at all is placed on storytelling, improvisation can quickly dissolve

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 688-689). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 

into slurry. If this is good-natured slurry, then the audience may still be charmed, and if it’s funny then so much the better, but this is guaranteed to provide nothing that the audience will remember the next day. Worse, the improvisers may be seduced into believing that the fact that they are improvising gives them a “free pass” from the audience, that the audience has no expectation of intelligence, story, character, logic or even coherence because “it’s just improv.”

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 689-693). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 

## How to improvise

We also tend to punish ourselves after we do things. Two adults will volunteer for something, and after they finish they’ll make a physical gesture of apology which says to the room: “No need to mention it—we know it wasn’t very good.” Maybe this is because we teach our children to punish themselves if they suspect they’ve failed. When you’re a kid, if you’re washing dishes and you break a plate and you say “Well, never mind, everyone drops things from time to time,” and you clean it up in a relaxed and happy fashion, your mother will shout at you. That in our society is a “bad attitude.” A “good attitude” is to cry and feel worthless. Then your mother will say “Never mind, darling, it was only an accident,” and clean it up for you. Therefore, as adults, we anticipate

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 809-815). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 

Telling stories is something human beings are essentially compelled to do. Not a day passes when we don’t exchange stories, and we cannot escape prepackaged stories of all kinds—not just books, movies, TV shows and plays, but simpler stories like newspaper headlines, billboard advertisements and snatches of overheard conversation on the bus.

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 852-854). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 

But the reality is that attempting any kind of performance with energy and focus and enthusiasm dramatically increases your chances of success.

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 1004-1005). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 

There is less shame in failing at something you are ill-equipped to do, so by making themselves seem not up to the task, they absolve themselves of the failure they “know” is coming. Despite the fact that they are pretty much guaranteeing failure by their own actions, they take a large degree of comfort from the fact that the failure is under their control. The safety of a certain failure is more rewarding than the possibility of success.

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 1007-1010). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 

But the reality is that attempting any kind of performance with energy and focus and enthusiasm dramatically increases your chances of success. So why don’t students typically volunteer with a big grin and an attitude of “Ah, this is going to be fantastic! What is it?”13 The answer is that by so doing they abandon control over the size of the gap between what they advertise and what they deliver. There is less shame in failing at something you are ill-equipped to do, so by making themselves seem not up to the task, they absolve themselves of the failure they “know” is coming. Despite the fact that they are pretty much guaranteeing failure by their own actions, they take a large degree of comfort from the fact that the failure is under their control. The safety of a certain failure is more rewarding than the possibility of success. The bold advertising of success, by contrast, is terrifying! Despite the fact that students would be upping their chances of success considerably by doing this, they would not then be able to control the size of the advertising/delivery gap, and this is a horrifying prospect. Related to this is the basic feeling that talent is innate, that learning has come to an end, and that they now know what they are good at and what they are bad at. (I’m talking about adults here, of course. For more on the differences between adults and children and the damage done by education, see “Teaching and Learning” on page 39) What’s peculiar about this game is how readily it demonstrates that your ability (talent) is related to your attitude. Want to be better at this game? Play it with an attitude of mild curiosity. Want to be even better? Play it with the same mental attitude, but wear an expression of joy and play it loudly and boldly. (Want to be even better? Play it while running from object to object but don’t crash into other people.) The other benefit you gets from playing the game loudly and cheerfully is that it turns off your internal censor. Pretty much everyone over the age of seven has one of these—the little mechanism inside your head that likes to check what you say before you say it. A very useful thing to have: It stops you from swearing in front of your grandmother. (If I think I can get away with it, or want to lower inhibitions and shake up a starchy group, I’ll say “stops you saying ‘fuck’ in front of your grandmother.”) But when improvising, it can be a nuisance, so it’s helpful to discover mechanisms which will not disable it, but temporarily silence it. If your attitude is one of cheerfulness and delight, you will fool your censor into thinking that there’s nothing here that needs checking. And so, if you do happen to point at a candlestick and say “penis,” there’s no harm done!

Salinsky, Tom. The Improv Handbook: The Ultimate Guide to Improvising in Comedy, Theatre, and Beyond (Modern Plays) (posizioni nel Kindle 1004-1024). Bloomsbury Publishing. Edizione del Kindle. 
