## Social Awareness Strategies
1. Greet people by name. Using and remembering someone’s name is a basic way to engage them. Picture the individual’s name spelled out, and use it at least twice in your first conversation with them. See Dale Carnegie’s How to Win Friends and Influence People for more on why this is so important.
2. Watch body language. By becoming an expert reader of body language, you’ll be better able to recognize emotional cues and adapt accordingly.
3. Make timing everything. Focus on the other person’s emotional state and frame of mind, instead of your own, to ascertain the right timing for what you need to communicate. One simple example is not asking for a favor when the other person is in an upset or angry emotional state.
4. Develop a back-pocket question. Having a prepared open-ended question in reserve is useful in cases when the conversation is dead, the other person is closing up, or you just don’t know what to say. This should be used when you need to inject some life into the interaction, not for conversations that are already emotionally charged.
5. Don’t take notes at meetings. If you’re focused on taking notes, you will likely miss important cues in the conversation. Most communication happens nonverbally, so whenever possible you should focus on the individuals, not your notes. If note-taking is necessary, make sure to take breaks at regular intervals to observe the people in the meeting and pick up emotional cues.
6. Plan ahead for social gatherings. It seems a bit stilted, but the reality is that planning ahead will allow you to be more emotionally present at the event. Write down anything you want to be sure to accomplish, and you’ll forget less and notice more.
7. Clear away the clutter. This involves bettering your listening skills by focusing on the other person’s words and expressions instead of thinking about what you want to say next. The difference is your mental purpose: are you in the conversation to impress the other person with your knowledge, or to learn something?
8. Live in the moment. Being present wherever you are instead of wasting your time regretting the past and worrying about the future will allow you to be more perceptive of the people around you.
9. Go on a 15-minute tour. The authors suggest taking 15 minutes out of each workday to walk around and observe emotional cues: the look of people’s workspaces, the timing of people’s movements, the overall mood, etc.
10. Watch EQ at the movies. Take the time to watch two movies specifically for the purpose of observing the character’s emotions, body language, relationships, interactions, etc.
11. Practice the art of listening. This means practicing a conscious focus on the speaker, and the tone, speed, and volume of their voice.
12. Go people watching. In order to improve your social awareness abilities, go to a coffee shop, grocery store, or other public place with the express purpose of observing people’s emotional states.
13. Understand the rules of the culture game. In today’s world, being socially aware requires that you develop emotional intelligence across the spectrum of the world’s cultures. This is a complex endeavor, as every culture has its own norms for personal, family, and business interactions. It will require patience as you watch and observe, taking extra time to understand the cultural expectations of people outside your own culture.
14. Test for accuracy. If you’re not sure what a cue is telling you about someone, you can always ask. State what you see (“You seem sad…”) and ask a direct question (“Did something happen?”)
15. Step into their shoes. Remember that people have different backgrounds and motivations. Put yourself in their situation, and from the perspective of how they would see things, try to understand why they are acting the way they are. When possible, check with them to see if your guesses are correct.
16. Seek the whole picture. Ask people about their perceptions of you, or send out a 360-degree survey to get feedback that will help you understand how you appear to others.
17. Catch the mood of the room. Moving from perception of individuals to being able to read the room is a big leap in abilities. You’ll probably have a gut feeling, but you can also observe groups of people to see how they are talking, how they are moving, how they are grouped, etc. It can be helpful to do this with someone who is experienced in reading a room.
